---
layout: post
title: "People (compassion)"
date: 2014-08-02 12:00:00 +1200
category: thoughts
tags: [Society]
description: "say it out loud: 'I deserve a better life than those people because I lucked out on the genetic and social lottery'"
post_image: 
---
What happens to the people who do menial or procedural work when their
jobs are automated?

My perspective is that no one chooses to be born, no one gets to choose
what their genetic make-up is and no one gets to choose what environment
they are raised in. This is not a catch-all for having no responsibility
for the outcomes of your life, but if someone is born with the traits of
laziness and below average intelligence into a low socio-economic group
then the odds are stacked against them. And none of that is their fault.
Add onto that physical and mental health issues, bad parents, poor
education or an irreversible bad choice and you've got people who's jobs
will be replaced, the unemployed and the imprisoned (and worse). 

If we treated social 'disease' such as unemployment, homelessness,
drugs, crime, etc like we did medical disease - as a collection of
symptoms with tested and proven treatments to be made and then
discharged - rather than as things we punish, hide and deride then we
would all live in a better place.\

I don't use this as an excuse for people to do stupid things without
consequences, just as fact of humanity and society.  I know what I was
gifted that I did not earn - I know for sure that I don't have the drive
to pull myself out of the situations I know others are raised in.

If you believe that "they" deserve to have a measurably *worse* life
(not superfluous material things, I mean good housing, health,
education, food, good public space, safety, internet access, watching
movies, buying books(being a member of society requires these things))
than you because they are not as smart and not as driven then say it out
loud: "I deserve a better life than those people because I lucked out on
the genetic and social lottery" and then accept the slow realisation
that you're a bit of a selfish arsehole.

I believe that those basics should be accessible to everyone, no matter
how stupid or lazy. I believe this to be compassion, and that's my
starting point. \

I'm not going to try and go into the future of what jobs will be
replaced (I'm guessing 'all but machine manufacturers and service
people' (assuming machines can't repair themselves)), but try to convey
my concern for how society is going to deal with it, and that you are
probably part of the problem.

In the past, "machines" have replaced jobs widely and people have learnt
new skills, done more complicated tasks, retired or become unemployed
(probably in that order of precedence) - tractors\[farm workers\],
assembly lines\[factory workers\], email\[secretaries\], etc. We don't
have hundreds of thousands of people unemployed everywhere so they have
been and are finding work elsewhere. (I won't try and address the
sociological aspects of the detachment of *creation* in work, but that
secret, hollow feeling that you're not doing anything of real value is
possibly related.)

The idea that concerns me is that some people are incapable of doing
jobs any more complicated than can be automated . This goes back, for
now, to my first paragraph - I know too many people that deride these
people as lazy and stupid 'and if they just worked hard and bettered
themselves' etc, putting 100% blame of their situation on them as it was
some choice. We can all stand there from our white, middle class porches
and lament their laziness and lack of drive, all the while unemployment
and crime soar, social outcomes for these people get worse - there are
no jobs that remain for them to do.\

Now, please also keep in mind that this may someday be you, as
technology continues to advance - some kind of dirty Peter Principle
where the machines are promoted past *your *level of competence.\

So how will you react when we have large swathes of unemployable people?
Remove minimum wage to make employing them more attractive? Continue to
blame them at dinner parties while feeling smug about your success?

The people who invented the modern world had the intent of reducing the
burden of our labour to allow us time for individual pursuits - it was
seen that by now we'd be barely working at all, with the machines
creating enough wealth to support all of society with the minimum of
effort.

So why aren't we all working  2 days a week?

This is where you're the problem. For two reasons: Job = status + money.
You still see the only value in people in their productive output - ie
their job - if someone does not work then they have zero value to
society. This is reflected in the monetisation of arts such as music
(how else are they supposed to eat?). This includes how you view
yourself - the better you are at work, the better you are.

And the more money you earn (which let's remember for the most part has
less relation to the societal importance of the work you do than the
ability of it to make someone else more money (see: teachers, garbage
removal, nurses, bio-security, vs investment bankers, currency
speculators, accountants, lawyers), the more things you can buy, the
bigger, nicer house, redder car, purer-bred dog, shiniest mobile phone. 

You could accept people as (truly) having value in ways beyond their
work, you could learn to work less for less pay and you could stop being
angry at those below you in society and think about who is really
screwing you over - those productivity gains in the last 30 years didn't
end up in your pay check (or the government's coffers).

Everyone is so blinded by the 'unfairness' of social welfare that they
fail to see a) that those people most likely have much less that is fair
than you and b) that we could, if we wanted to, decide to (the crux,
it's arrived!) just spend less time working, change the way society is
shaped, funded and driven. If there was enough wealth for everyone to
barely have to work (but still be able to should they want, of course!)
would you still be upset at the 'bludgers', upset that that you were no
longer better and richer? Or would you be relieved at your new
opportunities to spend time developing yourself as a person, writing
music, bad poetry, playing with your kids, running a personal petting
zoo or just doing plain old nothing but talking shit with your friends
on a hill somewhere looking over some sort of lovely body of water?

Automation of jobs can make that happen, but we need to shift as a
society to accept that our value as people is not our value as workers
and that while we are not all even remotely equal, we all deserve a good
life. From what I see now, this is going to be a tumultuous process and
I'm worried that politics and selfishness will win out.
